the first group of hostages held by
Hamas in the Gaza Strip have now been
freed the International Red Cross
confirmed Hamas released 24 hostages
among them are Israelis who have been
freed in exchange for Israel releasing
Palestinian prisoners this swap is part
of a deal broker by Kat also among the
freed captives are a group of Thai
Nationals but their release is separate
from the deal between Israel and
Hamas
and for the very latest Let's cross to
our correspondent tanyao who's following
the story for us from the hsim air base
that base in southern Israel is where
hostages are being received after their
release from captivity now uh Tanya isra
the Israeli Army says the hostages are
in Israel what's the situation where you
are are they
there well the Israel military said that
they received the hostages that they
were under undergoing a First Medical
check and that they were on their way
depending on their condition some of
them might be taken directly to
hospitals uh but it was the plan at
least to bring them here to the hatar
air base where a whole team a medical
team psychologists as well uh is
planning to uh receive them where they
go further medical checks uh you know
they've been now uh held captive for
over seven uh weeks uh in you know
during a war as well uh many of them you
know they might not know the full extent
of what happened on October 7 also you
know what happened to their their
relatives uh others might have seen uh
one of their relatives killed uh during
the terror attacks on October 7 now uh
also um this evening now the the names
and also some first pictures have been
released now of those hostages in the
bus we know it's children it's elderly
women and the the mothers uh of the the
children the names have been released
now and I think there's a s of relief
among many here in Israel that they're
now in Israel you know people know now
uh who they are and we also heard uh
from prime minister Benyamin Netanyahu
saying you know that he's basically um
saying we've completed now the first
stage um of this uh uh of those hostages
uh coming back home and he also said
that you know the country is uh you know
in a state of mixed em tions from Joy
pain sadness and determination because
there are so many others that need to be
brought back and of course we know that
a part of this agreement is that in the
next days we will see similar um uh
scenarios as we've seen today if all
goes well of course everything is very
fragile it's a volatile situation
everything could change but that in the
coming four days at least more of the
hostages should be released uh uh up to
50 hostages that's part of the agreement
potentially uh more in exchange for uh
uh the Palestinian prisoners that are
exchange and also more humanitarian Aid
uh are coming into uh the Gaza
Strip uh now in exchange Palestinian
prisoners uh were reportedly also
released what do you know about
that yeah we just got confirmation uh
that those 39 uh Palestinian uh
prisoners
uh were released now uh this is you know
coming after the release of the first
Israeli hostages and also the
international hostages that were
released um so they have been released
to the occupied West Bank and also to
East Jerusalem some of them uh were you
know also from East Jerusalem so uh
families and relatives had been waiting
for them as well and so these were 39 of
those uh of about 50 that are expected
to be released also uh in the coming
days which uh this is also part of this
uh agreement uh that had been broken by
Qatar uh with the help of Egypt the US
between Hamas and Israel now we're
seeing uh live pictures here from the
West Bank where people have gathered uh
to greet the uh Palestinian prisoners
that have been released by Israel uh
Thai Nationals Tanya were also released
East today what more can you tell us
about
that yeah this has been a deal that had
been brokered aside from uh this uh
other uh agreement um and we understand
that from Kat confirmed that 10 uh Thai
citizens were released and one citizen
uh from the Philippines now they were
also taken captive uh during the terror
attacks on October 7
uh many uh uh of uh the Thai citizens
are working in Israel they work in
agriculture uh some work in you know in
elderly care and there were also in
these uh um kibuts in the kibuts or in
the localities in the South when this
terror attack happened uh and uh some of
them were also killed some were taken
captive and some remain as well in Gaza
as well as many of the other hostages
the 200 over 230 hostages uh uh that are
still in Gaza being held and that I
still also need to be brought back home
now T how is the truce holding
up well so far um as I said it's a very
volatile situation it's uh a very
fragile uh truth but so far it has been
holding up there have been no uh
violations of course this can change at
any minute but for the moment it seems
that both sides are committed uh to keep
this truce moving and uh you know to go
ahead uh with uh uh the agreement as it
was
said reporting from thear Air Base thank
you as we've heard in the occupied West
Bank a group of 39 Palestinian inmates
are being freed as part of that
temporary truce large crowds gathered
near the Israeli offer prison to greet
them those released include only women
and miners the Red Cross representatives
were at the scene to collect the group
Israeli forces fired teargas at the
crowd in an attempt to push them back
from the
prison and with me in the studio is now
rw's Melinda crane Melinda uh can we
conclude at this stage that this release
of the hostages and this truce um is a
success so far so good it's still early
days as Tanya mentioned uh this is uh a
complex agreement with a lot of
different moving Parts but day one
appears to have gone according to plan
there was
some exchange of fire or at least one
way fire shortly after 7 when the
ceasefire began this morning but in fact
after that things did calm down
ceasefire appears to be holding Aid
appears to be entering the Gaza Strip
badly badly needed Aid uh as you know
used to be that hundreds of trucks would
enter every day uh in the last six weeks
that hasn't been the case but today if
all did go as planned there should have
been uh some uh up to 200 trucks
including food and cooking fuel fuel and
cooking oil both badly needed both have
been in short supply because author were
concerned uh the Israeli authorities
concerned that uh fuel could fall into
the hands of Hamas and then of course
the prisoner exchange and hostage
exchange going according to plan so
three more days to go but so far so good
now let's talk about Benjamin Netanyahu
his popularity rums are at Rock Bottom
uh Israelis are very angry with him can
the deal and the release of hostages
today can that sort of help his career
help keep him afloat possibly it will
stabilize uh some of his support um I
don't think it will bring back a lot of
those who are angry at him there are a
number uh of Israelis who believe that
it was because of his uh political Focus
namely on getting agreements with
neighboring Arab countries but
essentially sidelining the whole
Palestinian issue that it's because of
that that uh the situation in Gaza
became so untenable and resulted in the
attacks of October 7th so those who take
that Viewpoint I think won't be
convinced by the fact that finally uh
some hostages have been released in fact
Netanyahu dragged his feet for quite a
while on the release uh and he is
certainly dragging his feet on any form
or idea of a political two-state
solution uh of allowing the palestin
Authority for example to uh take over in
Gaza um essentially no words so far on
what's going to happen when the military
operation ends so those who are critical
of him I think it won't win them back it
may stabilize some support for some time
among others but many many observers
believe that his days are numbered and
that with the military operation comes
to an end uh his Reign may also come to
an end now uh there's a large
International Dimension to this whole uh
conflict uh today the Prime Minister of
Belgium and Spain held a press
conference at Egypt's baak Crossing what
do you make of this very problematic the
timing the location they were on a
two-day trip they apparently uh on the
first day spoke uh directly to uh
members of the Israeli government and
then they uh culminated their trip here
in on this day at the Rafa Crossing
which is uh surprising uh Choice uh of
of location and the words used by the
Spanish prime minister were quite
incendiary certainly from Israel's point
of view he said Israel has not complied
with international law that it needs to
do so that there needs to be a human
humanitarian ceasefire without time
limit and uh essentially said that if if
um the world Community doesn't go ahead
recogn izing uh Palestine as a state
that Spain uh or that if the EU does not
do so that Spain would go ahead on its
own so uh quite uh strong words from him
and not surprising that the Israeli
government is now asked the Spanish uh
uh ambassador to pay a visit that's so
they were summoned yeah uh so that's
exactly pretty strong diplomatically
speaking not yes um so what happens on
day five I mean this truce is supposed
to last four days what happens on day
five and your mention of international
concern and pressure is very pertinent
to that
because there will be a lot of pressure
on day five to extend the ceasefire and
Hamas May well play the card that is
open to it under the agreement to
release 10 more hostages and buy one
more day and then 10 more and buy
another day it would like to keep these
ponds for a while these hostages but it
may try to walk a tight rope there in
order to gain leverage regroup uh
reposition hostages even possibly over
the term of the ceasefire um and that
will only see pressure increase
internationally and uh certainly it's
not only Benjamin netanyahu's who's
under pressure Joe Biden is under
pressure also at home a very large share
of Democrats don't like his uh profound
solidarity with Israel many young
uh voters in America 70% are not happy
with Biden's foreign policy and he
himself faces a dilemma because he
doesn't want to see this escalate with
every day that the military operation
continues the chance of escalation with
Iran with Lebanon with Syria and others
increases so at the same time Joe Biden
would like to Tamp that down and he has
nonetheless said Hamas cannot rule in
Gaza any longer he has a dilemma on his
hands also on day five
Melinda crane thank you very much for
this
analysis we going to speak to Mo Crystal
he was a crisis negotiator for various
Israeli governments between 1994 and
2001 today he is the CEO of Nest that's
a consulting company that provides
negotiations and crisis management uh
training welcome uh to DW news miti I
assume you follow developments as
closely as we are here in this studio
from what we've seen so far is
everything going according to to plan in
your
book yes uh the first dispatch uh is
going according to the plan as we speak
the um 13 Israeli hostages and 12 ties
uh hostages uh cross the or are in the
cross the rough a crossing point are are
in Israel are in Egypt and they are
going to be transferred to uh uh Israel
uh very very uh very shortly now as
someone who has been involved in hostage
release negotiations how big is the risk
that something goes wrong somewhere in
between well the risk is very high the
risk is very high because so many uh
components so many elements are involved
uh it's Hamas leadership is Hamas
terrorists on the ground uh the Red
Cross the Egyptians all the elements
needs to be closely coordinated and we
have to bear in mind that we're dealing
with a a brutal Terror organization here
which not necessarily control all um all
its people so uh the risks that deal uh
will will for some reason uh there will
be some elements which will not comply
with with the agreement the risk is very
high uh given that that the uh the first
uh dispatch the first group of people
was um now already in Israel it's it's a
good sign I do hope that the next two
rounds of of the deal the two next
phases will be implemented as such it's
it's important to stress that it is in
the interest of Hamas to uh release this
50 people because they gain um more and
more uh days of Cal days Days of
ceasefire and uh it allows them to
reorganize and uh strengthen their line
of defense uh hoping that uh this CIS
file will be lead to International
pressure on Israel uh to actually end
the operation uh there that that's the
game plan of Hamas therefore they do
have an interest to maintain the um you
know a quiet execution of the release of
the
hostages now this First Agreement the
release of 50 hostages in exchange for
150 Palestinian prisoners is
successfully implemented in the next few
days do you expect the more hostages to
be released more quickly in the
future well the deal itself this what we
call humanitarian deal uh kids uh babies
um mothers elderly women Holocaust
Survivors this deal has some incentive
mechanism if Hamas will be able to add
additional kids babies women uh to the
deal Hamas will gain extra days of of
seiz fire therefore it is in the
interest of Hamas to com to continue and
to get possession of those hostages
which are not in their immediate uh uh
control because on this uh barbaric
Terror event of October seven also
Islamic Jihad the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad as well as other gangs Warlords
took hostages brutally and uh it's a
challenge for Hamas now to get them and
uh exchange them in the current
deal now let's talk about the
Palestinian prisoners uh that Israel
agreed to release in exchange for the
hostages who decides which prison prison
are put on that list and according to
what
criteria well the agreement articulates
General criteria which is mainly uh
female terrorists and um young
people uh not minor uh who committed uh
what we call the terror light Terror
were convicted for lighter offenses
lighter could be by the way a stubbing
attempt uh of of Jews of innocent uh
Israelis which didn't uh materialize to
death that that is what we considered uh
light Terror uh offenses uh the criteria
will were agreed and the names are uh in
the decision Sol decision of of Israel
at this part of the
deal so we are just now seeing a live
pictures there I don't know whether you
can actually see them there's a number
of ambulance Vans lined up there
ambulances which crossed of course the
Egyptians uh who are in charge of the
execution of of the deal uh they have a
significant role in
implementation of course they make a a
tremendous show uh I'm not sure to what
extent it is in the benefit of the
hostages uh definitely the kids uh uh
the young people who were held for 48
days in the in Hamas tunnels but you can
see in the picture that the elderly
women are actually uh waving you know
it's it's uh I'm I speaking to you
honestly try to be very uh I would say
Prof professional in cm but see these
Holocaust
Survivors going through through what
they went and still waving happily this
is the strength this is the Israeli
spirit this is the Israeli resilience
this is the national call which actually
supported the Israeli government to
negotiate with this Terror regime
because it's the moral obligation to
free hostages almost at any at any cost
at any price the crisis negotiated Monty
Crystal there thank you very much for
sharing your expertise with
us thank
you